# Internationalization

<p class="description">
Internationalization (i18n) is a solid part of Axe API to provide multi-language support to your API. In this section, we are going to try to explain how it works.
</p>

<ul class="intro">
  <li>You will learn</li>
  <li>What internationalization?</li>
  <li>How Axe API handles it?</li>
  <li>How to configure it?</li>
  <li>How do HTTP clients decide the language?</li>
  <li>How does Axe API manage the content?</li>
</ul>

## i18n

**Internationalization (i18n)** in REST APIs refers to the practice of designing APIs to support localization and _language-specific_ content. It involves creating APIs that can handle multilingual data, adapt to different cultural conventions, and provide responses in the user's preferred language.

APIs can achieve **i18n** by incorporating language tags, enabling language negotiation, providing localized error messages, and offering language-specific content.

Internationalization in REST APIs ensures a seamless user experience across different regions and cultures, allowing applications to cater to a global audience and support diverse language requirements.

## Axe API approach

Axe API provides the fundamentals of internationalization (_i18n_) by handling the current language selection process.

Since Axe API is Rest API Framework, it does **NOT** have any _user-related_ content except form validation messages. As the Axe API Core Team, we believe that giving developers freedom is more important than building an all-in-one framework.

In this section, you may find everything about internationalization.

## Configuration

As a developer, you are able to define which languages are supported in the `app/v1/config.ts` file, with the `default language` like the following example.

:::tip
Since the configuration file is version-based, you are able to provide different languages on different versions if you want.

That helps to add _multi-language_ support in the future when if you don't want to support it in the first place.
:::

```ts
const config: IApplicationConfig = {
  supportedLanguages: ["en-GB", "en", "de"],
  defaultLanguage: "en-GB",
};
```

:::tip
You should use the [ISO 639-1 Standard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-1_codes) in configurations.
:::

You should pick a default language, and also the supported languages as an array.

## Setting the current language

Clients are able to select the preferred languages by [Accept-Language](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Accept-Language) request **HTTP header**. Please check the following example out.

```yaml
Accept-Language: fr-CH, fr;q=0.9, en;q=0.8, de;q=0.7, *;q=0.5
```

Basically, we define that to see the content in `fr-CH` (_Swiss French_) with this HTTP Header. Also, the client is accepting to see the content in any other language in case `fr-CH` is not supported by the API. `q=` parameter is refer to priority.

:::tip
You can find more in the [Accept-Language](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Accept-Language) documentation.
:::

Axe API analyzes the `Accept-Language` HTTP header and decides in which language the content will be presented. Also, it uses the `defaultLanguage` value if there is no matched language between the client and the server.

This is a very efficient way to determine which language will be used with the HTTP context.

## Current language

Axe API carries the `currentLanguage` value in all **HTTP Request-Response** cycles. Anywhere in the code, you can access the `currentLanguage` value via [AxeRequest](/reference/axe-request) object.

```ts
import { IContext } from "axe-api";

const onBeforeInsert = async ({ req }: IContext) => {
  console.log(req.currentLanguage);
};

export { onBeforeInsert };
```

The `currentLanguage` type is look like the following interface;

```ts
interface ILanguage {
  title: string; // Full title of the language code, en-GB
  language: string; // Short title of the language code: en
  region?: string | null; // Regional title of the language code: GB
}
```

:::tip
You can import this interface from `axe-api` like the folowing example;

```ts
import { ILanguage } from `axe-api`
```

:::

## Form validation messages

As a developer, you don't have to do anything for the form \*validation messages**. `i18n` structure works perfectly with form validation messages. The form validation message language will be set automatically by the client's **HTTP Request Header\*\*.

For example, if you want to support _German_ in your application, you should configure your files like the following examples;

`app/v1/config.ts`

```ts
const config: IApplicationConfig = {
  // ...other configurations
  supportedLanguages: ["en", "de"],
  defaultLanguage: "en",
};
```

The form validation messages will be shown in **German** if the client sends an HTTP request like the following one;

```bash
$ curl \
  -d '{"name": "", "surname":""}' \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Accept-Language: de" \
  -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/users
```

This is the HTTP response example;

```json
{
  "errors": {
    "email": ["Das email Feld muss ausgefüllt sein."],
    "name": ["Das name Feld muss ausgefüllt sein."],
    "surname": ["Das surname Feld muss ausgefüllt sein."]
  }
}
```

:::tip
You can find all the supported languages from [validatorjs](https://github.com/mikeerickson/validatorjs) via [here](https://github.com/mikeerickson/validatorjs/tree/master/src/lang).
:::

## HTTP response header

Axe API adds the [Content-Language](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Language) HTTP headers to the responses.

This is an example result;

```yaml
Content-Language: en-GB
```

You can use this value to understand which language has been selected as the language in an HTTP request.

## System Messages

_Axe API_ may throw many system errors for developers. These messages will not be able to translate due to they are not related to users.

## Next step

In this step, we've learned many things about the configuration. In the next step, we are going to talk about how you can manage errors.
